# abm-project
Fall 2015 ABM course final project with Bill
# Lateral Gene Transfer and the Rise of Eukaryotes

by William Herzberg | Robert Kramer




## Executive Summary        
### Problem Statement
The emergence of Eukaryotes was a major biological event. It is attributed to a non-standard mechanism of evolution, lateral gene transfer which is not only of historic interest, but also an ongoing process.
Purpose of Model Building
Our goal is to recreate aspects of the pre-eukaryotic environment and flesh-out how lateral gene transfer led to the emergence of eukaryotes by a series of plausible steps.
### Summary of Key results
Perfect protection against infection would block evolution by lateral genetic transfer.  Plausible genealogies of eukaryotic origin were obtained. In a “rough” environment, increased motility despite increased metabolic expenditure is favored. Population dynamics are unanticipated and complex.  It remains unclear whether the original aerobic-anaerobic bacterial interactions were parasitic, commensal or symbiotic, but if they were parasitic, initial virulence was low. Extensions of this model may be used to model eukaryotic nucleus formation. The addition of other DNA elements to model more realistic genomes may be fruitful. The model could be applied to the spread of culture among other domains.
### Background
We modeled the emergence of eukaryotes by way of lateral genetic transfer. We know that eukaryotes emerged and were successful.  Eukaryotes originated from the merger of prokaryotes with different attributes following the release of oxygen from cyanobacteria. But much of our knowledge is qualitative and limited; this knowledge does not lend itself to either equation based modeling, nor predictive ABM models. Implicit in the modeling of eukaryotic emergence is the heterogeneity of agents, the particularity of their interactions with each other and with a textured, spatial landscape characterized by regions with varying amounts of sugar, oxygen, and the various micro-organisms. It is hard to imagine a modeling scenario other than ABM that would capture the different behaviors of aerobic, anaerobic, phagocytic, non-phagocytic, oxygen tolerant and oxygen intolerant creatures acting with predator / prey behavior.

Evolutionary changes are largely conceived as variation and selection of traits vertically transmitted from parents to offspring.  These changes are thought to occur gradually and lead to divergent forms in a stately tree-like fashion. Yet, the fossil record indicates that at times the pace of evolution can be rapid. Catastrophic exogenous events (asteroids), endogenous complexity catastrophe events (as described by Stuart Kauffman) and variation of mutation rates may account for many of these periods of rapid growth and collapse.  The merging of remotely related lineages via lateral genetic transfer can also result in rapid evolution. This is both of historic import and a vital ongoing process.

Roughly 4.5 billion years ago the earth formed. The oldest rocks of earthly origin available for analysis are 3.8 billion years old and demonstrate the absence of oxygen. By 3.8 billion years ago there is evidence of anaerobic bacteria in the fossil record.  By 3.2  billion years ago there is evidence of  photosynthetic cyanobacteria that left signature chemical traces in stromatolite formations. Cyanobacteria like all other life forms at the time were strictly anaerobic, but as a  “side effect” of the generation of glucose from carbon dioxide, water and sunlight these photo-synthesizers produced highly reactive oxygen gas as a waste product.  There is evidence of aerobic bacteria dating back to 2.5 billion years ago. Most of the oxygen gas released by cyanobacteria was trapped by iron and did not enter the atmosphere until this metal and organic buffers were saturated 2.3 billion years ago.  The great oxygenation event due to cyanobacteria significantly changed the fitness landscape for anaerobes.  By poisoning the atmosphere with oxygen and secondarily (perhaps) triggering global cooling due to the depletion of atmospheric methane, most anaerobes must have perished in a massive extinction.  However, the presence of oxygen cleared the way for eukaryotes which emerged  1.5 billion years ago. Free-living proto-mitochondria entered into an endo-symbiotic relation with anaerobic prokaryotes. Through lateral gene transfer, the merged lineage of proto-mitochondria and aerobic prokaryotes became the progenitors of single celled eukaryotes and all multi-cellular life on earth.
